Data Science Insight 3

                                               Short-term Predicitons in Agent-based Modeling
                                                      

Agent-based models function by identifying common characteristics across individuals, and then using those characteristics to forecast future actions of the group. While this is extremely effective when modeling a system’s behavior in the long-term, agent-based models notoriously struggle with making short-term predictions. Typically, agent-based models are calibrated once using historical data and then use that knowledge to project future data. However, in a stochastic and dynamic system—a system that both contains randomness and that changes over time, respectively—the model variables will eventually begin to differ from their historical values. Since agent-based models are generally incapable of incorporating up-to-date data, over time, their original projections no longer reflect reality. To mitigate this issue, Le-Minh Kieu, Nicolas Malleson, and Alison Heppenstall designed a new approach to agent-based modeling that combines parameter calibration and data assimilation to dynamically optimize these models and increase the accuracy of their real-time predictions.

The team focused primarily on modeling the operations of a bus route. A bus route is a dynamic and stochastic system. The number of passengers waiting for a bus and the road conditions a bus rides through are affected both by time and a certain level of randomness. This makes it difficult to accurately model a bus’s location and estimated arrival time. Kieu, Malleson, and Heppenstall attempted to solve this issue by developing a stochastic and dynamic agent-based model called “BusSim-truth”. BusSim-truth generates two sets of data: the first is historical data that simulates “normal” bus operations; the second is real-time GPS data that models the system for today. The model begins with two classes—bus and bus stop—and predefined parameters. At the current time step, the bus determines whether or not the next time step will be larger than the bus’s scheduled dispatch time. If it is, then the bus classifies itself as either moving towards the next stop, currently at a stop and picking up passengers, or finished with service. When the bus is moving, it is geolocated to determine whether it is approaching a bus stop. All of these decisions (and more) allow the model to ascertain whether the bus is on schedule, and if not, how long it will take for the bus to arrive at its next stop. 

BusSim-truth was found to be successful at modeling the complex bus system because it incorporated parameter calibration and data assimilation. Parameter calibration was crucial to adjusting the model to the stochastic nature of the variables. For parameter calibration, the team used a cross-entropy method (CEM), which is famous for its ability to work with both a large number of variables and variables with small probabilities. CEM goes through a process of drawing and evaluating variables from a probability distribution and then creating improved distributions until the optimal parameters have been chosen. This was performed with variables such as number of buses, number of time steps, location of bus, etc. To handle the dynamic nature of these variables, the team incorporated data assimilation into the model. Specifically, they used an algorithm called the particle filter (PF). The particle filter takes a vector that identifies the state of the system at a certain time and places a weight on that vector. The vector and its weight are called a particle (P). The particle filter then uses the particle of the previous time step (Pt-1) to recursively to estimate the current particle (Pt). Data assimilation and parameter calibration together optimize the model variables to predict current state data, which ultimately allows the agent-based model to generate accurate short-term forecasts.

This new method of short-term predictions via agent-based modeling is useful for predicting bus route operations like bus location and arrival time. Beyond that, however, the ability to model a complex system that is both dynamic and stochastic in real-time is applicable to many passenger information systems and intelligent transport systems, as well as systems in many other fields. This research and new technique furthers the agent-based modeling field’s ultimate goal of increasing model accuracy while making them as up-to-date and close to reality as possible. 

                                                  Source
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsos.191074
